cn. nnn] rores. 117

“litterssul of shields.” The genitive is akin to that after verbs of
filling. cf. cadus vini, “a cask (full of) wine.’'

14. his: “such conduct‚'' ‘¹ such sights.’'

16. Kalendis Iuniis : on the occasion referred to in xxxix. 7.

18. egeret: subjunctive in causnl relative clause, ‘⁴ inasmuch as he
had no need.'’ neque . , . et. . .: “did not . . . but rather. . . ‚”
as usual.

21. defendisset : subjunctive in concessive relative clause.

23. numerum . . .prorogavit: “extended the term of years (allowed)
for the (tenure of the) provinces.'' Caesar had ruled that consular
provinces should not be held by the same governor for more than two
years, nor practoriun provinces for more than one year. Antonius
caused a law to be passed extending the tenure (apparently only in
certain cases) to five (or six) years.

24. deberet : subjunctive in concessive clause.

26. publicis: sc. rebus, as also with privatis.

27. sine promulgatione: “without promulgation’' of the new
law which cancellcd the old. Constitutionul procedure required a
notice (promnlyalio) of at least seventeen days (tritam nundinum).

28. testamentum: sc. Caesaris.

29. infimis civibus: dative of interest: “in case of the meunest
citizens,’⁷ let alone of Caesar.

30. signa, tabulas . . . hortis: “statuary‚ pictures . . . pleasure-
grounds.‘'

31. Pompei: see xxvii. 26.

32 Scipionis ε the villa aliena of xvii. 2.

ch. XLIII. 3. pulvinar, simulacrum, fastigium, flaminem: various
attributes of divinity. 'she pulvinar wus the ceremonial “conch’'
upon which was exposed the simzclaerecm, “ statue,” of the deity on
occasions of public thanksgiving, niourning, 01· intercession. Fastiyium
is the triangular gable which overhssngs the front of a Roman temple.
Such a gable was erected over the house in which Julius Caesar had
resided as Pontifex Maximus. A flamen (‘· kindler ⁷') was attached as
priest to most divinities‚ but more particularly to Jupiter (Flamen
Dialis), to Mars, and to Quirinus. XVhen Caesar was deified, he also
received his flamen, viz. M. Antonius.

6. inauguraris: “get yourself consecrated’' ns flamen. This cere-
mony answered to our ⁴⁶ ordination ” into the minis-try.

7. vide qui . . . inauguret: “ find an augur to consecrate you.”
An augur was necessary; hence calleque sumus, for Cicero, like
Antonius, was one of the College of Augurs.

9. mortui: for it is profanity to speak of the “ priest” of a mere
mortal.

11. ludorum: which were held September l5th to lSth, so that the
fourth day was also the last. But a fifth day was added on Antonius'
motion, so that from 43 B.c. onward the games lasted five days. Heri
shows that this speech pul-ports to be delivered on September leth.

12. caesari: ⁴· in Caesar's honour.”

